Carnival 25th Anniversary Project.
Interviewer Steve Fletcher.
Interviewees Marion Russell and Katie Griffiths.
The date today is Thursday, Wednesday the 22nd of January 2015.
And the venue for the interview is the Swicker office.
Marion first.
Marion, for the record, would you be kind enough to spell your name in full?
Certainly, M-A-R-I-O-N-R-U-S-S-E-L-L.
Thank you very much. And Katie, over to you.
K-A-T-I-E-G-R-I-F-F-I-T-H-S.
That's fantastic.
Well, I'm very much looking forward to this interview because between you, you've wrapped up,
it's got to be going on for at least 20 carnivals.
How did it all begin?
Well, I first started working as a youth worker at the Tan in the grounds of Ninnium Park School,
where there was a workshop open to adults and kids from the youth club
to go along and learn how to play some steel pans.
I went along with some of my youth club kids, no adults turned up.
And as I recall, the guy said,
why don't you have a go woman and pick up them sticks and play the hell out of them?
And I tried and then ended up in the Swicker All-Star Steel Pan Band.
And I'm actually thinking that you were the traditional woman on the bass that you were playing,
what some would say is the hardest part of a steel pan orchestra,
which is six full tuned oil drums at one time.
Is that right? You're a bass player.
That's right. 45 gallon oil drums.
I started with five and went on to play six and ended up actually being a guest at Notting Hill Panorama
Steel Orchestra Festival.
So that was Steel Pan. That's how you first met Carla Carnival and Swicker.
Yes.
But obviously, costumes soon loomed fresh in your life.
So what was the first Cardiff Mask Carnival as it was then that you came to the carnival camp
and got involved with your children, one of whom, of course, is Katie and is with us today.
Hello. I was like waves, like in an orange and yellow little pants and like fire was it almost.
Ninnian Park School.
How old would you have been at the time?
1991. So I would have been six.
That's fantastic. It's a very young age to get involved.
And right early at the beginning as well.
And so, Marion, what do you remember of that carnival camp?
I remember that I roped a couple of friends in and one was actually eight months pregnant at the time.
And she turned out to be dressed as waves while the children went on to be dressed as other characters.
And I ended up on the back of a float playing my heart off with the Swicker All-Star Steel Band.
1991 was the year, of course, that we put the Cardiff Mask Carnival together with the Butetown Carnival.
So I have memories of you being on the back of a lorry in your red t-shirt playing like a demon.
And, you know, wonderful, wonderful carnival music on steel pans.
One, because you're not huge, are you?
One, virtually challenged lady surrounded by six of gigantic bass bins,
bass steel pans and just moving across them. You were like, I don't know.
There was a blur. You were in motion all the time and dancing as you were doing it.
Oh, yes. And I also broke my finger playing them.
And my elbows took a couple of cracks.
So I started wearing skateboarders elbow pads because I moved around so much to get from my front notes to my back.
I often bash my elbows, thus bruising them and chipping them a couple of times.
So the skateboarders elbow pads were fab.
If I say the word pom pom, will you leave the room screaming in horror?
So pom pom horror. What does that involve?
Making thousands upon thousands upon thousands for one costume alone,
which was a huge backpack costume depicting sort of the sun and the vibrance of the sun and its rays.
We had to make one thousand inch long yellow pom poms of a certain firmness
that were literally sewn on the entire costume.
And a woman called Monica wore the costume and looked absolutely amazing.
And I can't tell you how high it was or wide it was.
But those pom poms, I used to be in charge of asking people to make them in their spare time.
And people used to literally run away from me and scream in horror if they saw me even pick up a little round cardboard circle and some wool.
People wore them in their ears, on their shoes.
We made jumbo size ones and people just got to dislike me intensely.
It's the pop girl queen. Run for it.
Yeah. Oh, God. So, Katie, I mean, you were very much grew up with at the mass camp, the carnival camp and the rest of it.
What was it like? What sort of freedoms did you have?
Because we were there for a purpose, but we were also there socially and the rest of it.
And I just remember you being part of a, what can I say, sort of like a gang of urchins who were part of the inner circle.
You're very much part of the family of creativity.
So, yeah, what comes to mind?
I mean, I understand that upon occasion, you may have even slept in the carnival camp.
Is that right? Yeah, we've slept in material boxes in the foam room, anywhere, really.
They had soft soft materials.
Yeah. And we just put a bit of material on us and just sleep in the boxes while men were still making costumes and whatever else.
It was just like one big family.
Everyone knew each other and it was it was amazing to be a part of.
But it was the best three weeks of freedom that I have had in my life.
Just once a year.
And of course, you both got involved in the very first times that we tried to extend the carnival experience by by having a pre carnival.
Events based on that which you find in Trinidad and the Caribbean.
Jouvet, which is short for the French, the Jouvet, the day opens.
So it's a pre carnival event and it's very much based on dirty mass.
What what what what can you tell us about the very first ever Jouvet?
The the yeah. Tell us what comes to mind.
I think it was mud that we covered ourselves in and it was literally just put your hair in whatever style you wanted.
I think I wrapped mine around coils of metal, so it looked like lots of snakes.
And then we literally just grabbed handfuls of mud and water and just smeared it all over ourselves.
So we were covered. It was everywhere.
And then we just went out and just sang jab jab and just ran.
Advertised the carnival to come.
Try and get as many people to come.
And I remember you and your brother actually saying to me, are we really allowed?
Yeah. As somebody said, I didn't quite have enough mud on me.
And absolutely, I believe, tipped a bucket full over me until all you could see were my eyes.
And it was a wonderful feeling, especially when it dried.
I'm going to try something now.
I'm going to give it a chance.
See if you can respond. You know me well.
Jab jab. I come from hell.
Jab jab. There we have it.
The very first chart for the famous you.
You know, the jab jabs, the traditional devils that you find in the rest of it.
Marion, you're a legend.
You're carnival carnival legend, obviously.
But amongst the many legendary things you have done,
you had a very interesting performance relationship with an Irish lady
for at least a couple of years called Dawn.
Could you care to tell us about you and Dawn, particularly
if I were to say snakes?
Oh, yes.
For future generations, this is a good one.
Well, I only ever saw dear Dawn, who was Irish, once a year at carnival time,
and then we never got in contact or saw each other again.
And we were told that we were born to be free spirits.
So we kind of instead of staying in line, we were allowed to go
and kind of be the fools, the clowns and to get people laughing and smiling
and go amongst the the the crowd and everything.
And also send messages at one time from one end of the carnival to the other.
So we did quite a lot of running and slowly but surely we started off
quite clad in bright costumes.
And then the clothes seemed to get less and the paint got more.
I had the pleasure.
And I'm not ashamed to say at the age of 40
was our
the best year of my life.
I think I have never felt so liberated is when a body artist
painted us in black and vibrant blue.
And we were symbolizing snakes.
And I remember gyrating, which is a wonderful word,
dancing on the museum steps
and running through town with no clothes on, just body paint.
And people don't believe you're going to be as you run past them.
They don't quite their brains don't think that person hasn't got any clothes on
until you're already past them.
And they kind of look and they say,
well, she or wasn't she wearing clothes?
And I remember that being the best experience of my life
from somebody that wouldn't even go topless on a beach
or wear a bikini, let alone anything else.
But that's what mass did to me.
That's an extraordinary experience.
Of course, I can't be with us today.
He's a resident in Milton Keynes.
But your son, David, was very much part of
what the whole carnival experience and the crew, as it were.
One costume in particular comes to mind.
If I mentioned David as a frog,
and if I mentioned Jelly, would you care to explain how
how David brought his frog costume literally to life?
Oh, well, a lovely guy called Rob Davie
helped David and a friend of his make these wonderful frog costumes.
And they actually appeared in South Wales Echo,
making the costumes and everything.
And I found out afterwards that
they decided to make their costumes are a little bit extra special for the crowd.
And it managed to install some sort of contraption.
They held jelly about their person at which they spawned
at various times in the carnival at the delight of a lot of the crowd.
They produced this jelly from either squirty bottles
or at one time their own mouths and water guns
and sort of fired this jelly, obviously quite safe jelly
that didn't stay enclosed.
Thank goodness. Or we hope.
And he had the whale of a time doing that.
He was delighted, in fact.
Katie's played a number of different costumes, but
I think one in particular might have some significance.
There's an epic moment in the Cardiff Carnival's history where
one of the we used to have a finale on the steps of the National Museum
and generate huge audiences, perhaps 5000 strong big family audiences
who came to watch the finale.
And we would often try to tell a story or more than one story
during the course of that.
And one of the earliest and perhaps the first incarnations on the steps
involved a scene which was the battle between good and evil.
And naturally, evil were
body painted devils who were armed with
quite sophisticated sort of booster water shotguns filled with
red dyed paint
to symbolize blood.
And they they were basically I'll hand over the story to Katie,
who was a angelic, beautiful
angel in the most beautiful white wings and a carnival costume.
But but but with only it had no color.
It was just white.
What do you remember of your angel death?
So we had to learn a dance by Maryanne, I think it was at the time.
Like you said, we were, you know, beautiful angels.
I thought I was in the bit as, you know, a lovely angel.
And I didn't know what I was letting myself in for.
And we did our dance, our routine that we learned on the museum steps.
And then all of a sudden, we just got squirted and basically massacred
with red paint all over us.
And we had to let out this scream
as though we were dying, which I'm drama
Rama anyway, so that was really easy for me.
So we literally had to faint to our knees covered in this paint
over the top screaming, you know.
Yeah. And I basically a lot of devil slaughtered
and put a lot of innocent dancing angels basically. Yeah.
Can you remember the reaction from the audience of this?
Horrified. I think I don't think they quite got it, to be honest.
But yeah, it was great fun,
especially being squirted with the bright red paint.
But yeah, it was fun.
But I was covered in paint for probably, you know,
can you remember when you probably went back to school?
Remember when you finished all of a sudden,
very carnivory, lovely music uplifting came on and you all resurrected there
and then and the audience actually had to cheer.
I think we're brought back to life.
We couldn't leave you dead on the steps of the National Museum.
That would be right or appropriate, would it?
No, no.
Again, back in the early days, we used to have
something like before health and safety was invented,
we would use inappropriate, safeguarded ways, I hasten to add
fire and even pyrotechnics.
I believe you.
I mean, we used to have an expert, a pyrotechnician,
a professional pyrotechnician called Alan May come over from Bristol
in the final week of the carnival camp.
And he would think how we could
fix up certain costumes on everybody with some pyrotechnic elements.
I believe you enjoyed some of these.
Tell us about your pyrotechnic moments in the early carnivals.
So we were my myself, my brother and a couple of his friends.
We were dressed in white outfits that we'd roll tires over to look like
like road markings all over us.
And we had these
hats that were shaped like cars made out of bamboo and
paper mache.
And we walk in down the street and they decided to make some exploding dice.
And they were literally just like fluffy red material made into dice.
But little did we know what was inside them.
So they were firecrackers, which were amazing, considering
we weren't allowed to play with anything like that.
So to be just given free, you know, of these exploding dice,
my brother thought it was amazing more than me, I think.
But yeah, he went on to join the army. He did. Yeah.
There could be a link between these two things.
But they were the most wildest firecrackers ever.
They would literally, you know, you'd have to be quick in throwing them.
Otherwise, you'd probably have your hand taken off by them.
Oh, yes.
And in many senses, we are very fond memories of the time.
And certainly when we were at Kutais Community Centre and would
would line up and of course, if you know the location,
we would line up and in a sense would finally come in
to order as we began to crest the Kutais bridge before turning into the civic centre.
Marion, I mean, what was it like
sort of cresting that bridge and looking behind you?
I remember. Oh, I remember making a point
and I was ready and everyone was lined up, just warming up
the various different bands, all the sections getting in together and everything.
And I ran ahead to be on the brow of the hill.
I think I was hoping to take a couple of pictures,
but there's not many places to hide your camera when you haven't got many clothes on.
I just remember suddenly the setting off
and it took my breath away and I was so proud to be a part of it.
And it was like a beautiful sea of all the different sections coming down the streets.
And I was just breathtaking.
It was thrilling. It was I can't describe in words.
And it was so vibrant and so multicultural
because there was so many people had taken part, kids, elderly people,
people with pushchairs.
But the sections were absolutely amazing.
And to think all of this was made out of bits
and from absolutely nothing.
Nothing was bought, made.
It was all made just by volunteers and hard work
and workers that were guiding us.
And it was absolutely stunning.
So, Katie, as a very young child, you ended up performing
on the finales on the steps of the National Museum.
I mean, what was that experience like for you?
What was it like to see that big an audience and to perhaps hear that?
I mean, they used to cheer and all the other.
What can you remember? What did it feel like?
It just felt like, I don't know, really, just
just like I was doing it just naturally.
I just, you know, I was brought up to it from being six years old
and walking through town and obviously having a mother that ran through naked.
You know, so when I went back to school, I was always reminded of that.
But it was just amazing to just because everyone was such like a family.
And you knew if, you know, if you turned somewhere and saw someone,
you always you were always going to know them.
And, you know, it was just it was amazing to just be given that freedom.
You know, not only one night, but obviously for the three weeks that we did
carnival, it was, you know, I looked forward to it.
You know, in both your cases, if you had to name
your personal favorite costume, because you've got so many to
or you can name more than one.
But which costumes out of the many you've played come to mind?
Probably be me being a firefly with Natasha, Davey
and a child of confusion, because I literally just walked around
looking confused for the entire carnival
and jab jabs, because that was just, you know, that was amazing.
Just being dressed like that.
A few marrying what we stand out costumes.
I adored being a dragon and I each one had its own
individual kind of theme.
And but I must admit, I cannot get over the fact
that I danced on that museum steps with nothing but body paint on.
And the feeling was I don't think even when I'm old, I'll look back at that.
And I'll never forget it as long as I live.
And I was a few pounds lighter, I think.
Marianne and Katie, big, big thanks for all your carnival memories.
I think this is a particularly pointed and wonderful interview.
I suspect we may do this again in a few weeks because,
you know, you've just got you were so much part of it all
and lived it and embodied it.
But at this point, I have to award you both
kind of carnival hero status.
Marianne and Katie, thank you for the day.